---
alias:
  - Risk Factors for Suicide Ideation Differ From Those for the Transition to
    Suicide Attempt
created: 2023-05-10
updated: 2023-08-31
---

# Risk Factors for Suicide Ideation Differ From Those for the Transition to Suicide Attempt: The Importance of Creativity, Rigor, and Urgency in Suicide Research

- Type : #article 
- Date read: 2023-05-10
- Bibtex: @nock2016
- Bibliography: Nock, M. K., Kessler, R. C., & Franklin, J. C. (2016). Risk Factors for Suicide Ideation Differ From Those for the Transition to Suicide Attempt: The Importance of Creativity, Rigor, and Urgency in Suicide Research. _Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice_, _23_(1), 31–34. [https://doi.org/10.1111/cpsp.12133](https://doi.org/10.1111/cpsp.12133)

---
# Example citation


---
# My notes
- They scold May & Klonsky pretty hard, saying that they market something as new and novel when it is in fact established in the field for a while.
- Lots of discussion of why they excluded some studies, for example a large WHO study with over 100k participants.
- 

---

# Abstract
We were invited to comment on the article by May and Klonsky (2016) titled “What Distinguishes Suicide Attempters From Suicide Ideators? A Meta-Analysis of Potential Factors.” We were delighted to see the authors calling attention to the fact that the risk factors for onset of suicide ideation differ from those for the transition from suicide ideation to attempt. Our commentary focuses on three points: (a) despite the authors' framing it as such, this is not a new research question, but one with a substantial history; (b) this meta-analysis excludes most of the available data on this topic and focuses instead on results from small and nonrepresentative studies, limiting the validity of the inferences that can be drawn from this analysis; and (c) this meta-analysis was designed in a way that precludes the examination of actual risk factors for the transition from suicidal thought to action. We conclude by discussing some important considerations for future research.
PDF: [nock_2016_risk_factors_for_suicide_ideation_differ_from_those_for_the_transition_to.pdf](file:///Users/oskarflygare/Library/CloudStorage/OneDrive-KarolinskaInstitutet/30-39%20Resources/37%20-%20Personal%20research%20library/zotero-articles/Nock/nock_2016_risk_factors_for_suicide_ideation_differ_from_those_for_the_transition_to.pdf)

%% Import Date: 2023-05-10T14:01:14.516+02:00 %%
